doc: release notes for nRF Connect SDK 2.3.0 (#10387)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases/release-notes-2.3.0.rst

.. _ncs_release_notes_230:

|NCS| v2.3.0 Release Notes
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

|NCS| delivers reference software and supporting libraries for developing low-power wireless applications with Nordic Semiconductor products in the nRF52, nRF53, nRF70, and nRF91 Series.

> The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

Author: I really don't like that parenthesis within parenthesis here. I would just leave as is , RTOS should be an obvious term for SDK users. @umapraseeda

Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.

To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Highlights
**********

The following list includes the summary of the most relevant changes introduced in this release.

* Added :ref:`support <software_maturity>` for the following features:

  * nRF7002 Wi-Fi 6 companion IC and nRF7002 DK.
  * Bluetooth® Low Energy: Period Advertising Sync Transfer.
    This feature allows Periodic Advertising synchronization data to be transferred over an ACL connection, which gives power saving benefits for energy constraint devices.

>     This is a key feature for the `Auracast`_™ Assistant.

Author: fixed

Sign up for the `nRF Connect SDK v2.3.0 webinar`_ to learn more about the new features.

The official nRF Connect for VS Code extension has also been improved.
See the `latest release notes for nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code`_ for more information.

Release tag
***********

The release tag for the |NCS| manifest repository (|ncs_repo|) is **v2.3.0**.
Check the :file:`west.yml` file for the corresponding tags in the project repositories.

To use this release, check out the tag in the manifest repository and run ``west update``.
See :ref:`cloning_the_repositories` and :ref:`gs_updating_repos_examples` for more information.

For information on the included repositories and revisions, see `Repositories and revisions for v2.3.0`_.

IDE and tool support
********************

`nRF Connect extension for Visual Studio Code <nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code_>`_ is the only officially supported IDE for |NCS| v2.3.0.
SEGGER Embedded Studio Nordic Edition is no longer tested or expected to work with |NCS| v2.3.0.

:ref:`Toolchain Manager <gs_app_tcm>`, used to install the |NCS| automatically from `nRF Connect for Desktop`_, is available for Windows, Linux, and macOS.

> 

Author: Added but made it into a first section in the changelog.

  * Updated:

    * Documentation by adding energy consumption information.
    * Documentation by adding a section about distance offset calibration.
    * Configuration of the GPIO pins used by the DM module using the devicetree.

* :ref:`peripheral_nfc_pairing` and :ref:`central_nfc_pairing` samples:

  * Fixed OOB pairing between these samples.

Bluetooth mesh samples
----------------------

* Enabled the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_FLASH_NRF_PARTIAL_ERASE` Kconfig option in the following samples:

  * :ref:`bluetooth_ble_peripheral_lbs_coex`
  * :ref:`bt_mesh_chat`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_client`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_server`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc`

* :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc` sample:

  * Updated:

    * Enabled the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_FLASH_NRF_PARTIAL_ERASE` Kconfig option.
    * The specification-defined illuminance regulator (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MESH_LIGHT_CTRL_REG_SPEC`) now selects the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPU` option by default.
      Therefore, enabling it explicitly in the project file is no longer required.

nRF9160 samples
---------------

> * Added the :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.
> * Added the :ref:`nidd_sample` sample that demonstrates how to use Non-IP Data Delivery (NIDD).
> * Added the :ref:`slm_shell_sample` sample for nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices to send AT commands to nRF9160 SiP from shell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added:

  * The :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.
  * The :ref:`nidd_sample` sample that demonstrates how to use Non-IP Data Delivery (NIDD).
  * The :ref:`slm_shell_sample` sample for nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices to send AT commands to nRF9160 SiP from shell.
```

  * nRF9160: Simple MQTT sample.
    This is now replaced by a new :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_fota` sample:

  * Updated:

    * Device status information, including FOTA enablement, is now sent to nRF Cloud when the device connects.
    * Removed user prompt and button press handling for FOTA enablement.
    * The sample now uses a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

* :ref:`azure_fota_sample` sample:

  * Updated the sample to use the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`azure_iot_hub` sample:

  * Updated the sample to use the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`aws_iot` sample:

  * Updated the sample to use the logging subsystem for console output.

Thread samples
--------------

* Updated the overlay structure:

    * The :file:`overlay-rtt.conf` file was removed from all samples.
    * The :file:`overlay-log.conf` file now uses RTT backend by default.
    * Logs removed from default configuration (moved to :file:`overlay-logging.conf`).
    * Asserts removed from default configuration (moved to :file:`overlay-debug.conf`).

* :ref:`ot_cli_sample`:

>   * Added the :file:`overlay-low_power.conf` and :file:`low_power.overlay` files to facilitate power consumption measurements.

Reviewer: Is this entry specific to this sample? In the changelog it appears to be a common entry.

Author: The original text says: 
 * :file:`overlay-low_power.conf` and :file:`low_power.overlay` **to the CLI sample** to facilitate power consumption measurements.
 , so that's why I made this format change.

      This includes special sockets such as event sockets created using the :c:func:`eventfd` function.
    * The minimal value of the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_MODEM_LIB_SHMEM_RX_SIZE` Kconfig option to meet the requirements of modem firmware 1.3.4.
    * The :c:func:`nrf_modem_lib_diag_stats_get` function now returns an error if called when the :ref:`nrf_modem_lib_readme` library has not been initialized.
    * The trace backend interface to be exposed to the :ref:`modem_trace_module` using the :c:struct:`nrf_modem_lib_trace_backend` struct.
    * The :ref:`modem_trace_module` to support backends that store the trace data for later retrieval.

* :ref:`lib_location` library:

  * Added:

    * Support for the application to send the Wi-Fi access point list to the cloud.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_EXTERNAL` Kconfig option that replaces the following configurations:

      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_GNSS_AGPS_EXTERNAL``
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_GNSS_PGPS_EXTERNAL``
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_CELLULAR_EXTERNAL``

      The new configuration also handles Wi-Fi positioning.

>     * Introduced several new Kconfig options for default location request configurations, including default method priority configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Several new Kconfig options for default location request configurations, including default method priority configuration.
```

      * HERE v1 API.
      * nRF Cloud CA certificate handling.

    * Improved GNSS assistance data need handling.
    * GNSS filtered ephemerides are no longer used when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_AGPS_FILTERED_RUNTIME` Kconfig option is enabled.
    * Renamed:

      * ``enum location_cellular_ext_result`` to ``enum location_ext_result``, because Wi-Fi will use the same enumeration.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_NRF_CLOUD`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_NRF_CLOUD`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE_API_KEY`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE_API_KEY`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE_HOSTNAME`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE_HOSTNAME`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE_TLS_SEC_TAG`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE_TLS_SEC_TAG`.

  * Fixed an issue causing the A-GPS data download to be delayed until the RRC connection release.

> * Added the :ref:`lib_modem_slm` library.
> 
>   * This library is meant for the external MCU to work with nRF9160 SiP through the Serial LTE Modem application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added the :ref:`lib_modem_slm` library. 
  This library is meant for the external MCU to work with nRF9160 SiP through the Serial LTE Modem application.
```

* :ref:`modem_info_readme` library:

  * Added the :c:func:`modem_info_get_hw_version` function to obtain the hardware version string using the ``AT%HWVERSION`` command.

* :ref:`lte_lc_readme` library:

  * Fixed an issue where cell update events could be sent without the cell information from the modem actually being updated.

Libraries for networking
------------------------

> * Added the :ref:`lib_mqtt_helper` library that simplifies Zephyr MQTT API and socket handling.
> * Added the :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud_alerts` library for sending notifications of critical device events to nRF Cloud, using either REST or MQTT connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added:

  * The :ref:`lib_mqtt_helper` library that simplifies Zephyr MQTT API and socket handling.
  * The :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud_alerts` library for sending notifications of critical device events to nRF Cloud, using either REST or MQTT connections.
```

Use the latest version of the nRF Programmer app of `nRF Connect for Desktop`_ to update the modem firmware.
See :ref:`nrf9160_gs_updating_fw_modem` for instructions.

Modem-related libraries and versions
====================================

.. list-table:: Modem-related libraries and versions
   :widths: 15 10
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Library name
     - Version information
   * - Modem library
     - `Changelog <Modem library changelog for v2.3.0_>`_
   * - LwM2M carrier library
     - `Changelog <LwM2M carrier library changelog for v2.3.0_>`_

Known issues
************

Known issues are only tracked for the latest official release.
See `known issues for nRF Connect SDK v2.3.0`_ for the list of issues valid for the latest release.

.. _ncs_release_notes_230_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE and tool support
====================

* Removed the :file:`scripts/tool-version-minimum.txt` file because only one toolchain version is used for testing.
  The table in :ref:`gs_recommended_versions` has been updated accordingly to no longer specify minimum tool versions.

> MCUboot

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be part of the MCUboot section further down?

Author: I think it's a subtle difference - this is not a change coming from MCUboot itself but our Kconfig option that defines how we use MCUboot.

.. _ncs_release_notes_230:

|NCS| v2.3.0 Release Notes
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

|NCS| delivers reference software and supporting libraries for developing low-power wireless applications with Nordic Semiconductor products in the nRF52, nRF53, nRF70, and nRF91 Series.
The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

> Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
> 
> To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.
```

The "learn more" line refers to the experimental part.

Highlights
**********

The following list includes the summary of the most relevant changes introduced in this release.

* Added :ref:`support <software_maturity>` for the following features:

  * nRF7002 Wi-Fi 6 companion IC and nRF7002 DK.
  * Bluetooth® Low Energy: Period Advertising Sync Transfer.
    This feature allows Periodic Advertising synchronization data to be transferred over an ACL connection, which gives power saving benefits for energy constraint devices.
    This is a key feature for the `Auracast™`_ Assistant.

>   * nRF Cloud Location Services Wi-Fi® feature support in the :ref:`lib_location` library and demonstrated in :ref:`asset_tracker_v2`, :ref:`modem_shell_application`, and :ref:`lwm2m_client`.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is accurate. Wi-Fi support for Location library and Modem shell sample has been there for quite some time with ESP8266. Even with nRF7002EK, the support was in 2.2.0 already. It's true that nRF7002EK support has been added to ATv2 in 2.3.0. I guess same applies to LwM2M.
I don't know how accurate we want to be but it would be nice to get a comment on this from the one that provided the sentence to the highlights.

Author: This has been now changed to:
Location library now supports sending both Wi-Fi and cellular location data to nRF Cloud location services for improved location accuracy. This is demonstrated in Asset Tracker v2, Modem Shell, and LwM2M client.

Reviewer 3: Ok, I guess that's good if the intention is to highlight the feature where we send both Wi-Fi and cellular location data to the cloud at the same time, instead of doing two independent requests.

  * Writing modem trace to external flash for later retrieval.
    The :ref:`modem_shell_application` sample now demonstrates how to store and upload modem trace to cloud.
  * New :ref:`Serial LTE Modem (SLM) Shell <slm_shell_sample>` sample:
    The sample demonstrates sending AT commands to the nRF9160 SiP from shell for nRF53 and nRF52 Series SoCs.
  * New :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample supporting Wi-Fi together with cellular connectivity (replacing the Simple MQTT sample).

* Added :ref:`experimental support <software_maturity>` for the following features:

  * Periodic Advertisement with Responses (PAwR) - Advertiser.
    This is a new feature introduced in Bluetooth v5.4 specification, enabling the bidirectional exchange of application data using connectionless communication.
    Learn more in our `Bluetooth 5.4 DevZone blog`_.
    The SoftDevice Controller continues to be Bluetooth v5.3 qualified.
  * Bluetooth LE Audio: Public Broadcast Announcement (PBA) and bidirectional streams to and from two headsets.
  * New :ref:`wifi_sr_coex_sample` sample.

> 

Reviewer 4: Can we add a statement about adding the FEM support in ESB? Something like:

> * Added FEM support in the :ref:`esb_readme` library.

Reviewer 4: @bjorn-tore-taraldsen could you advice?

Reviewer 5: I think this is worth mentioning in the release note, but not sure if it important enough to be part of highlight.

* Improved:

  * The :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample has been extended to support switching between Matter over Thread and Matter over Wi-Fi during application operation.
  * The :ref:`wifi_shell_sample` sample by adding the Power Save feature.

See :ref:`ncs_release_notes_230_changelog` for the complete list of changes.

> Sign up for the `nRF Connect SDK v2.3.0 webinar`_ to learn more about the new features.

Reviewer 2: I would add these lines to line 20. Adding them there won't hide the highlights, but will bring more attention to the webinar and the changelog.

The official nRF Connect for VS Code extension has also been improved.

> See the `latest release notes for nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code`_ for more information.

Reviewer 2: This is inaccurate, as there was no release for the VSC extension these days. @trond-snekvik , do we want this here?

Author: Good catch, I think I removed that originally but must have come back in some rebase. Removing

Release tag
***********

The release tag for the |NCS| manifest repository (|ncs_repo|) is **v2.3.0**.
Check the :file:`west.yml` file for the corresponding tags in the project repositories.

To use this release, check out the tag in the manifest repository and run ``west update``.
See :ref:`cloning_the_repositories` and :ref:`gs_updating_repos_examples` for more information.

For information on the included repositories and revisions, see `Repositories and revisions for v2.3.0`_.

IDE and tool support
********************

`nRF Connect extension for Visual Studio Code <nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code_>`_ is the only officially supported IDE for |NCS| v2.3.0.

> SEGGER Embedded Studio Nordic Edition is no longer tested or expected to work with |NCS| v2.3.0.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this line here still? This is the third release since the deprecation of SES, so we should be meeting the requirements to stop mentioning this in the docs (@tejlmand once said we need to announce deprecation and keep the info for 2 releases before we get rid of it).

Author: confirmed by Ingar that we can remove this sentence

:ref:`Toolchain Manager <gs_app_tcm>`, used to install the |NCS| automatically from `nRF Connect for Desktop`_, is available for Windows, Linux, and macOS.

Supported modem firmware
************************

See `Modem firmware compatibility matrix`_ for an overview of which modem firmware versions have been tested with this version of the |NCS|.

Use the latest version of the nRF Programmer app of `nRF Connect for Desktop`_ to update the modem firmware.
See :ref:`nrf9160_gs_updating_fw_modem` for instructions.

Modem-related libraries and versions

> ====================================

Reviewer 2: We usually avoid to have headers without a following description, so a short desc to introduce the table after this header would be in order. But do we even need this header? Isn't "Supported modem firmware" covering the table already?

Author: I will leave it as this serves as a title for the table. We do have a ton of section headings without short descriptions in this document.

  * Application-specific Kconfig options that can be used to enable the :ref:`lib_caf` modules and to automatically tailor the default configuration to the nRF Desktop use case.
    Each used Common Application Framework module is handled by a corresponding application-specific option with a modified prefix.
    For example, :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_SETTINGS_LOADER <config_desktop_app_options>` is used to automatically enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_SETTINGS_LOADER` Kconfig option and to align the default configuration.
  * Prompts to Kconfig options that enable :ref:`nrf_desktop_hids`, :ref:`nrf_desktop_bas`, and :ref:`nrf_desktop_dev_descr`.
    An application-specific option (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BT_PERIPHERAL <config_desktop_app_options>`) implies the Kconfig options that enable the mentioned modules together with other features that are needed for the Bluetooth HID peripheral role.
    The option is enabled by default if the nRF Desktop Bluetooth support (:ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BT <config_desktop_app_options>`) is enabled.

> * Updated:
> 
>   * Implemented the following adjustments to avoid flooding logs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Updated:

  * Logging mechanism by implementing the following adjustments to avoid flooding logs:
```
Style inconsistency: "Updated Improved".

  * The :ref:`nrf_desktop_fast_pair_app` to remove the Fast Pair advertising payload for the dongle peer.
  * The default values of Bluetooth device name (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_DEVICE_NAME`) and Bluetooth device appearance (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_DEVICE_APPEARANCE`) are set to rely on the nRF Desktop product name or the nRF Desktop device role and type combination.
  * The default value of the Bluetooth appearance (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_DEVICE_APPEARANCE)` for nRF Desktop dongle is set to ``keyboard``.
    This improves the consistency with the used HID boot interface.
  * USB remote wakeup (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USB_DEVICE_REMOTE_WAKEUP`) is disabled in MCUboot bootloader configurations.
    The functionality is not used by the bootloader.
  * :ref:`nrf_desktop_hids` registers the GATT HID Service before Bluetooth LE is enabled.
    This is done to avoid submitting works related to Service Changed indication and GATT database hash calculation before the system settings are loaded from non-volatile memory.

>   * Simplified configuration of application modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Configuration of application modules.
```

  * Updated:

    * Documentation by adding :ref:`energy consumption <ble_nrf_dm_power>` information.
    * Documentation by adding a section about :ref:`distance offset calibration <ble_nrf_dm_calibr>`.
    * Configuration of the GPIO pins used by the DM module using the devicetree.

* :ref:`peripheral_nfc_pairing` and :ref:`central_nfc_pairing` samples:

  * Fixed OOB pairing between these samples.

* :ref:`direct_test_mode` sample:

  * Fixed an issue where the antenna switching was not functional on the nRF5340 DK with the nRF21540 EK shield.

* :ref:`peripheral_hids_mouse` sample:

  * Fixed building the sample with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HIDS_SECURITY_ENABLED` Kconfig option disabled.

Bluetooth mesh samples
----------------------

* Enabled the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_FLASH_NRF_PARTIAL_ERASE` Kconfig option in the following samples:

  * :ref:`bluetooth_ble_peripheral_lbs_coex`
  * :ref:`bt_mesh_chat`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_client`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_sensor_server`
  * :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc`

* :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc` sample:

  * Updated:

>     * Enabled the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SOC_FLASH_NRF_PARTIAL_ERASE` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 6: This line is covered in the above list

    * The specification-defined illuminance regulator (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MESH_LIGHT_CTRL_REG_SPEC`) now selects the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPU` option by default.
      Therefore, enabling it explicitly in the project file is no longer required.

nRF9160 samples
---------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.
  * The :ref:`nidd_sample` sample that demonstrates how to use Non-IP Data Delivery (NIDD).
  * The :ref:`slm_shell_sample` sample for nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices to send AT commands to nRF9160 SiP from shell.

* :ref:`modem_shell_application` sample:

  * Added:

    * External location service handling to test :ref:`lib_location` library functionality commonly used by applications.
      The :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud` library is used with MQTT for location requests to the cloud.
    * New command ``th pipeline`` for executing several MoSh commands sequentially in one thread.

>     * New command ``sleep`` for introducing wait periods in between commands when using ``th pipeline``.

Reviewer 6: in between -> between?

    * New command ``heap`` for printing kernel and system heap usage statistics.

  * Updated:

    * Timeout command-line arguments for the ``location get`` command changed from integers in milliseconds to floating-point values in seconds.
    * Replaced deprecated LwM2M API calls with calls to new functions.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_cell_pos_sample` sample:

  * Added the usage of GCI search option if running modem firmware v1.3.4.

>   * Updated the sample, so that it waits for RRC idle mode before requesting neighbor cell measurements.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * Updated the sample to wait for RRC idle mode before requesting neighbor cell measurements.
```

  * Updated the sample to use a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_device_message` sample:

  * Added sending an alert to nRF Cloud on boot.

* Removed:

  * Multicell location sample because of the deprecation of the Multicell location library.
    Relevant functionality is available through the :ref:`lib_location` library.
  * nRF9160: Simple MQTT sample.
    This is now replaced by a new :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_fota` sample:

  * Updated:

    * Device status information, including FOTA enablement, is now sent to nRF Cloud when the device connects.
    * Removed user prompt and button press handling for FOTA enablement.
    * The sample now uses a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

* :ref:`azure_fota_sample` sample:

  * Updated the sample to use the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`azure_iot_hub` sample:

  * Updated the sample to use the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`aws_iot` sample:

  * Updated the sample to use the logging subsystem for console output.

Thread samples
--------------

> * Updated the overlay structure:
> 
>     * The :file:`overlay-rtt.conf` file was removed from all samples.
>     * The :file:`overlay-log.conf` file now uses RTT backend by default.
>     * Logs removed from default configuration (moved to :file:`overlay-logging.conf`).
>     * Asserts removed from default configuration (moved to :file:`overlay-debug.conf`).
> 
> * :ref:`ot_cli_sample`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Updated the overlay structure:

  * The :file:`overlay-rtt.conf` file was removed from all samples.
  * The :file:`overlay-log.conf` file now uses RTT backend by default.
  * Logs removed from default configuration (moved to :file:`overlay-logging.conf`).
  * Asserts removed from default configuration (moved to :file:`overlay-debug.conf`).

* :ref:`ot_cli_sample`:
```
Style: indent inconsistency.

      Because of this, some parts of the API are replaced with new ones as follows:

      * Event :c:enum:`LOCATION_EVT_CLOUD_LOCATION_EXT_REQUEST` replaces old events ``LOCATION_EVT_CELLULAR_EXT_REQUEST`` and ``LOCATION_EVT_WIFI_EXT_REQUEST`` that are removed.
      * Function :c:func:`location_cloud_location_ext_result_set` replaces old functions ``location_cellular_ext_result_set`` and ``location_wifi_ext_result_set`` that are removed.
      * Member variable :c:var:`cloud_location_request` replaces old members ``cellular_request`` and ``wifi_request`` that are removed in :c:struct:`location_event_data`.
      * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_CLOUD_RECV_BUF_SIZE` replaces ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_CELLULAR_RECV_BUF_SIZE`` and ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_REST_RECV_BUF_SIZE``.

    * The :ref:`lib_multicell_location` library is deprecated.
      Relevant functionality from the library is moved to this library.
      The following features were not moved:

      * Definition of HTTPS port for HERE service, that is :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MULTICELL_LOCATION_HERE_HTTPS_PORT`.
      * HERE v1 API.

>       * nRF Cloud CA certificate handling.

Reviewer 2: I would move this information to the top of this library subsection (line 748), as it is not just a simple line about an update. Also, I would add a link to https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/software_maturity.html#api-deprecation (see comment below).

>     * Improved GNSS assistance data need handling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * GNSS assistance data need handling.
```
Style: consistency with header ("Updated").

>     * GNSS filtered ephemerides are no longer used when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_AGPS_FILTERED_RUNTIME` Kconfig option is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * GNSS filtered ephemerides mechanism.
      These are no longer used when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_AGPS_FILTERED_RUNTIME` Kconfig option is enabled.
```
Style: consistency with header ("Updated").

    * Renamed:

      * ``enum location_cellular_ext_result`` to ``enum location_ext_result``, because Wi-Fi will use the same enumeration.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_NRF_CLOUD`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_NRF_CLOUD`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE_API_KEY`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE_API_KEY`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE_HOSTNAME`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE_HOSTNAME`.
      * ``CONFIG_LOCATION_METHOD_WIFI_SERVICE_HERE_TLS_SEC_TAG`` to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_HERE_TLS_SEC_TAG`.

  * Fixed an issue causing the A-GPS data download to be delayed until the RRC connection release.

* Added the :ref:`lib_modem_slm` library.

>   This library is meant for the external MCU to work with nRF9160 SiP through the Serial LTE Modem application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This library is meant for the external MCU to work with nRF9160 SiP through the :ref:`serial_lte_modem` application.
```

* :ref:`modem_info_readme` library:

  * Added the :c:func:`modem_info_get_hw_version` function to obtain the hardware version string using the ``AT%HWVERSION`` command.

* :ref:`lte_lc_readme` library:

  * Fixed an issue where cell update events could be sent without the cell information from the modem actually being updated.

> 

Reviewer 2: + extra entry for the removed library?
```suggestion
* :ref:`lib_multicell_location` library is :ref:`deprecated <api_deprecation>` and will be removed in one of the future releases.
```

Libraries for networking
------------------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`lib_mqtt_helper` library that simplifies Zephyr MQTT API and socket handling.
  * The :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud_alerts` library for sending notifications of critical device events to nRF Cloud, using either REST or MQTT connections.

* :ref:`lib_azure_iot_hub` library:

  * Pulled out the :file:`azure_iot_hub_mqtt.c` file that is now implemented by a new library :ref:`lib_mqtt_helper`.

* :ref:`lib_multicell_location` library:

  * This library is now deprecated and relevant functionality is available through the :ref:`lib_location` library.

* :ref:`lib_fota_download` library:

  * Fixed:

    * An issue where the :c:func:`download_client_callback` function was continuing to read the offset value even if :c:func:`dfu_target_offset_get` returned an error.
    * An issue where the cleanup of the downloading state was not happening when an error event was raised.

* :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud` library:

  * Added:

    * Support for full modem FOTA updates using a partition in external flash.

>     * Device status information is automatically sent to nRF Cloud when the device connects if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS` Kconfig option is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Automatic sending of the device status information to nRF Cloud when the device connects if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS` Kconfig option is enabled.
```

      Network information is included if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS_NETWORK` Kconfig option is enabled.
      SIM card information is included if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS_SIM` Kconfig option is enabled.

>     * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_DEVICE_STATUS_ENCODE_VOLTAGE` Kconfig option controls if device voltage is included when device status data is encoded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_DEVICE_STATUS_ENCODE_VOLTAGE` Kconfig option, which controls if device voltage is included when device status data is encoded.
```

>     * An application version string can now be included in the :c:struct:`nrf_cloud_init_param` struct.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Possibility to include an application version string in the :c:struct:`nrf_cloud_init_param` struct.
```

  * Updated:

    * The MQTT disconnect event is now handled by the FOTA module, allowing for updates to be completed while disconnected and reported properly when reconnected.

>     * GCI search results are now encoded in location requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Encoding of the GCI search results.
      These are now encoded in location requests.
```

>     * The neighbor cell's time difference value is now encoded in location requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Encoding of the neighbor cell's time difference value.
      It is now encoded in location requests.
```

    * The way buffers are declared is updated when the instance is created.
      Now the memory-region devicetree property works independently for each instance and does not require the specific instance name.

* :ref:`caf_sensor_manager`:

  * Updated by cleaning up :file:`sensor_event.h` and :file:`sensor_manager.h` files.
    Moved unrelated declarations to a separate :file:`caf_sensor_common.h` file.

DFU libraries
-------------

* :ref:`lib_dfu_target` library:

  * Added:

    * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DFU_TARGET_FULL_MODEM_USE_EXT_PARTITION` Kconfig option to support the ``FMFU_STORAGE`` partition in external flash.
    * The :c:func:`dfu_target_full_modem_fdev_get` function that gets the configured flash device information.

sdk-nrfxlib
-----------

See the changelog for each library in the :doc:`nrfxlib documentation <nrfxlib:README>` for additional information.

Scripts
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`script <scripts>`.

* :ref:`west_sbom`:

>   * The output now contains source repository and version information for each file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Updated the output contents.
    The output now contains source repository and version information for each file.
```

.. _ncs_release_notes_230:

|NCS| v2.3.0 Release Notes
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

|NCS| delivers reference software and supporting libraries for developing low-power wireless applications with Nordic Semiconductor products in the nRF52, nRF53, nRF70, and nRF91 Series.
The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Highlights
**********

The following list includes the summary of the most relevant changes introduced in this release.

* Added :ref:`support <software_maturity>` for the following features:

  * nRF7002 Wi-Fi 6 companion IC and nRF7002 DK.
  * Bluetooth LE: Period Advertising Sync Transfer.

>     This feature allows Periodic Advertising synchronization data to be transferred over an ACL connection, which gives power saving benefits for energy constraint devices.

Author: The release highlights content is strictly agreed upon with PMT so I will not be changing this.

>     This is a key feature for the Auracast(TM) Assistant.

Author: Changing the trademark to ™ and adding a link to https://www.bluetooth.com/auracast/how-it-works/

  * Added nRF Cloud Wi-Fi location support in the :ref:`lib_location` library and demonstrated in :ref:`asset_tracker_v2`, :ref:`modem_shell_application`, and :ref:`lwm2m_client`.
  * Added support to write modem trace to external flash for later retrieval
    The :ref:`modem_shell_application` sample now demonstrates how to store and upload modem trace to cloud.
  * New :ref:`Serial LTE Modem (SLM) Shell <slm_shell_sample>` sample:
    The sample demonstrates sending AT commands to the nRF9160 SiP from shell for nRF53 and nRF52 Series SoCs.
  * New :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample supporting Wi-Fi together with cellular connectivity (the sample replaces Simple MQTT).

* Added :ref:`experimental support <software_maturity>` for the following features:

  * Periodic Advertisement with Responses (PAwR) - Advertiser.
    This is a new feature introduced in Bluetooth v5.4 spec, enabling the bidirectional exchange of application data using connectionless communication.

>     Learn more on our Bluetooth 5.4 DevZone blog.

Author: link added

    The SoftDevice Controller continues to be Bluetooth v5.3 qualified.
  * Bluetooth LE Audio: Public Broadcast Announcement (PBA) and bidirectional streams to and from two headsets.
  * New :ref:`wifi_sr_coex_sample` sample.

* Improved:

  * :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample has been extended to support switching between Matter over Thread and Matter over Wi-Fi during application operation.
  * Improved the :ref:`wifi_shell_sample` sample by adding the Power Save feature.

See :ref:`ncs_release_notes_230_changelog` for the complete list of changes.

Sign up for the `nRF Connect SDK v2.3.0 webinar`_ to learn more about the new features.

> The official nRF Connect for VS Code extension also received improvements.

Author: The comment is ok but I will keep it open until I clarify if this should be here at all.

> The official nRF Connect for VS Code extension also received improvements.

Author: this is being removed, no new vs code extension release

  Moving forward, we recommend using the development tool CHIP Tool for Linux or macOS or mobile applications from publicly available Matter Ecosystems.

See `Matter samples`_ for the list of changes for the Matter samples.

Matter fork
+++++++++++

The Matter fork in the |NCS| (``sdk-connectedhomeip``) contains all commits from the upstream Matter repository up to, and including, the ``1.0.0.2`` tag.

The following list summarizes the most important changes inherited from the upstream Matter:

* Added:

  * The initial implementation of Matter's cryptographic operations based on PSA crypto API.
  * Build-time generation of some Zigbee Cluster Library (ZCL) source files using the :file:`codegen.py` Python script.
  * An alternative factory reset implementation that erases the entire non-volatile storage flash partition.

* Updated:

  * Basic cluster has been renamed to Basic Information cluster to match the specification.

Thread
------

* Added:

  * Support for setting the default Thread output power using the :kconfig:option:`OPENTHREAD_DEFAULT_TX_POWER` Kconfig option.
  * A Thread :ref:`power consumption data <thread_power_consumption>` page.

> See `Thread samples`_ for the list of changes for the Thread samples.

Reviewer: There are similar sentences for all other samples..may be we can change there too.

Zigbee
------

* Updated Zigbee Network Co-processor Host package to the new version v2.2.1.

> * Fixed an issue where buffer would not be freed at the ZC after a secure rejoin of a ZED.

Author: I think this is ok as is because these are separate sections (Updated vs Fixed)

  * Support for bidirectional streams to or from two headsets (True Wireless Stereo).
  * Support for interleaved packing.

* Updated:

  * Controller from version 3310 to 3330, with the following major changes:

    * Changes to accommodate BIS + ACL combinations.
    * Improvements to support creating CIS connections in any order.
    * Basic support for interleaved broadcasts.

  * Power module has been refactored so that it uses upstream Zephyr INA23X sensor driver.
  * BIS headsets can now switch between two broadcast sources (two hardcoded broadcast names).
  * :ref:`nrf53_audio_app_ui` and :ref:`nrf53_audio_app_testing_steps_cis` sections in the application documentation with information about using **VOL** buttons to switch headset channels.
  * :ref:`nrf53_audio_app_requirements` section in the application documentation by moving the information about the nRF5340 Audio DK to `Nordic Semiconductor Infocenter`_, under `nRF5340 Audio DK Hardware`_.

nRF Machine Learning (Edge Impulse)
-----------------------------------

* Added configuration option (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_APP_SENSOR_SLEEP_TO`) to set the sensor idling timeout before suspending the sensor.

> * Removed the usage of ``ml_runner_signin_event`` from the application.

Author: Will keep as is as these are essentially two single-item lists (Added and Removed)

    * New command ``th pipeline`` for executing several MoSh commands sequentially in one thread.
    * New command ``sleep`` for introducing wait periods in between commands when using ``th pipeline``.
    * New command ``heap`` for printing kernel and system heap usage statistics.

  * Updated:

    * Timeout command-line arguments for the ``location get`` command changed from integers in milliseconds to floating-point values in seconds.
    * Replaced deprecated LwM2M API calls with calls to new functions.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_cell_pos_sample` sample:

  * Added the usage of GCI search option if running modem firmware v1.3.4.
  * Updated the sample, so that it waits for RRC idle mode before requesting neighbor cell measurements.

* :ref:`lwm2m_client` sample:

  * Added:

    * Support for nRF7002 EK shield and Wi-Fi based location.
    * Location events and event handlers.

  * Updated:

    * The sensor module has been simplified.
      It does not use application events, filtering, or configurable periods anymore.
    * Replaced deprecated LwM2M API calls with calls to new functions.
    * Enabled LwM2M queue mode and updated documentation accordingly.

>     * Moved configuration options from :file:`overlay-queue.conf` to default configuration :file:`prj.conf`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * Moved configuration options from the :file:`overlay-queue.conf` file to the default configuration file :file:`prj.conf`.
```

>     * Removed :file:`overlay-queue.conf`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * Removed the :file:`overlay-queue.conf` file.
```

>     * Enabled :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LTE_LC_TAU_PRE_WARNING_NOTIFICATIONS` configuration option.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * Enabled the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LTE_LC_TAU_PRE_WARNING_NOTIFICATIONS` Kconfig option.
```

* :ref:`http_application_update_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_mqtt_multi_service` sample:

  * Added:

    * MCUboot child image files to properly access external flash on newer nRF9160DK versions.
    * An :file:`overlay_mcuboot_ext_flash.conf` file to enable MCUboot use of external flash.
    * Sending an alert to the cloud on boot and when a temperature limit is exceeded.

  * Updated:

    * The sample now uses a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_device_message` sample:

  * Added sending an alert to nRF Cloud on boot.

* :ref:`slm_shell_sample` sample:

  * Added:

>     * Sample for nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices to send AT commands to nRF9160 SiP from shell.

Reviewer 7: I guess the supported development kits were added, not sample as this says.

Author: This is actually about the new sample being added, moved it to the beginning of the section and rephrased into one bullet point.

  * nRF9160: Simple MQTT sample.
    This is now replaced by a new :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_fota` sample:

  * Updated:

    * Device status information, including FOTA enablement, is now sent to nRF Cloud when the device connects.
    * Removed user prompt and button press handling for FOTA enablement.
    * The sample now uses a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

* :ref:`azure_fota_sample` sample:

  * The sample now uses the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`azure_iot_hub` sample:

  * The sample now uses the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`aws_iot` sample:

  * The sample now uses the logging subsystem for console output.

Peripheral samples
------------------

* :ref:`radio_test` sample:

  * Added support for the nRF7002 DK.
  * Fixed sample building with support for the Skyworks front-end module.
  * Updated the documentation to clarify that this sample is dedicated for the short-range radio (Bluetooth LE, IEEE 802.15.4, and proprietary modes).

Thread samples
--------------

* Added:

>   * :file:`overlay-low_power.conf` and :file:`low_power.overlay` to the CLI sample to facilitate power consumption measurements.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * The :file:`overlay-low_power.conf` and :file:`low_power.overlay` files to the CLI sample to facilitate power consumption measurements.
```

Reviewer: Also, could be on a single line.

* Updated:

  * Overlay structure:

>     * :file:`overlay-rtt.conf` removed from all samples.
>     * :file:`overlay-log.conf` now uses RTT backend by default.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * The :file:`overlay-rtt.conf` file was removed from all samples.
    * The :file:`overlay-log.conf` file now uses RTT backend by default.
```

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`wifi_shell_sample` sample now uses the :ref:`lib_wifi_credentials` and :ref:`wifi_mgmt_ext` libraries.
  * The :ref:`wifi_provisioning` sample now uses the :ref:`lib_wifi_credentials` and :ref:`wifi_prov_readme` libraries.

* Removed nRF7002 revision A support.

Other samples
-------------

* Added the :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.

* :ref:`esb_prx_ptx` sample:

  * Added support for front-end modules and :ref:`zephyr:nrf21540dk_nrf52840`.

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

* :ref:`pmw3360`:

  * Updated by reducing log verbosity.

* :ref:`paw3212`:

  * Updated by reducing log verbosity.

* :ref:`lib_bh1749`:

  * Fixed an issue where the driver would attempt to use APIs before the sensor was ready, which in turn could make the application hang.

Libraries
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`library <libraries>`.

Binary libraries
----------------

* :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library:

  * Removed the dependency on the :ref:`lte_lc_readme` library.

Bluetooth libraries and services
--------------------------------

> * Added the :ref:`nsms_readme` library.
> 
> * Added the :ref:`wifi_prov_readme` library.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Added 
  * The :ref:`nsms_readme` library.
  * The :ref:`wifi_prov_readme` library.
```

* :ref:`mds_readme` library:

  * Fixed URI generation in the :c:func:`data_uri_read` function.

* :ref:`ble_rpc` library:

  * Fixed a possible memory leak in the :c:func:`bt_gatt_indicate_rpc_handler` function.

* :ref:`bt_le_adv_prov_readme` library:

  * Added the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_ADV_PROV_FAST_PAIR_STOP_DISCOVERABLE_ON_RPA_ROTATION` Kconfig option to drop the Fast Pair advertising payload on RPA rotation.

  * Updated:

> 	* Extended the :c:struct:`bt_le_adv_prov_adv_state` structure to include new fields.
>       The new :c:member:`bt_le_adv_prov_adv_state.rpa_rotated` field is used to notify registered providers about Resolvable Private Address (RPA) rotation.
>       The new :c:member:`bt_le_adv_prov_adv_state.new_adv_session` field is used to notify registered providers that the new advertising session is about to start.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	* Extended the :c:struct:`bt_le_adv_prov_adv_state` structure to include new fields.
          The new :c:member:`bt_le_adv_prov_adv_state.rpa_rotated` field is used to notify registered providers about Resolvable Private Address (RPA) rotation.
          The new :c:member:`bt_le_adv_prov_adv_state.new_adv_session` field is used to notify registered providers that the new advertising session is about to start.
```

Author: This is correct as is, github diff not showing the indendation correctly.

Bootloader libraries
--------------------

* :ref:`doc_bl_storage` library:

  * Updated:

    * The monotonic counter functions can now return errors.
    * The :c:func:`get_monotonic_version` function is split into functions :c:func:`get_monotonic_version` and :c:func:`get_monotonic_slot`.
    * The monotonic counter functions now have a counter description parameter to be able to distinguish between different counters.

* :ref:`doc_bl_validation` library:

  * Updated the :c:func:`get_monotonic_version` function so that it can now return an error.

Modem libraries
---------------

* :ref:`nrf_modem_lib_readme` library:

  * Added:

    * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_MODEM_LIB_TRACE_LEVEL_OFF` Kconfig option to set the modem trace level to off by default.
    * The flash trace backend that enables the application to store trace data to flash for later retrieval.

  * Updated:

    * It is now possible to poll Modem library and Zephyr sockets at the same time using the :c:func:`poll` function.
      This includes special sockets such as event sockets created using the :c:func:`eventfd` function.

>     * The minimal value of :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_MODEM_LIB_SHMEM_RX_SIZE` to meet the requirements of modem firmware 1.3.4.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * The minimal value of the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_MODEM_LIB_SHMEM_RX_SIZE` Kconfig option to meet the requirements of modem firmware 1.3.4.
```

    Updated code and documentation accordingly.

* :ref:`QoS` library:

  * Updated by removing the ``QOS_MESSAGE_TYPES_REGISTER`` macro.

* Secure Partition Manager (SPM):

  * Removed Secure Partition Manager (SPM) and the Kconfig option ``CONFIG_SPM``.
    It is replaced by the Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) as the supported trusted execution solution.
    See :ref:`Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) <ug_tfm>` for more information about the TF-M.

* Added the :ref:`lib_pcm_mix` library.
  This was previously a component of the :ref:`nrf53_audio_app` application, now moved to :file:`lib/pcm_mix`.

* :ref:`app_event_manager`:

  * Updated the way section names are created for event subscribers.
    This allows you to use any event naming scheme.
    For more information, see the :ref:`NCSIDB-925 <ncsidb_925>` issue description on the :ref:`known_issues` page.

Common Application Framework (CAF)
----------------------------------

* :ref:`caf_ble_smp`:

  * Updated:

    * Aligned the module with the recent MCUmgr API, following the :ref:`zephyr:mcumgr_callbacks` migration guide in the Zephyr documentation.

>       The module now requires :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_MGMT_NOTIFICATION_HOOKS` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_UPLOAD_CHECK_HOOK` configuration options to be enabled.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
      The module now requires the Kconfig options :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_MGMT_NOTIFICATION_HOOKS` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_UPLOAD_CHECK_HOOK` to be enabled.
```

* :ref:`caf_ble_adv`:

>   * Added the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_ADV_ROTATE_RPA` configuration option.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Added the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_ADV_ROTATE_RPA` Kconfig option.
```

    The option synchronizes Resolvable Private Address (RPA) rotation with the advertising data update in the Bluetooth Privacy mode.

>     Added dependent :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_ADV_ROTATE_RPA_TIMEOUT` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_ADV_ROTATE_RPA_TIMEOUT_RAND` options.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    Added dependent Kconfig options :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_ADV_ROTATE_RPA_TIMEOUT` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_ADV_ROTATE_RPA_TIMEOUT_RAND`.
```

    They are used to specify the rotation period and its randomization factor.

* :ref:`caf_overview_events`:

  * Added a macro intended to set the size of events member enums to 32 bits when the Event Manager Proxy is enabled.
    Applied this macro to all affected CAF events.

  * Updated by improving inter-core compatibility.

* :ref:`caf_sensor_data_aggregator`:

  * Updated:

    * :c:struct:`sensor_data_aggregator_event` now uses the :c:struct:`sensor_value` struct data buffer and carries a number of sensor values in a single sample, which is sufficient to describe data layout.

    * The way buffers are declared is updated when the instance is created.
      Now the memory-region devicetree property works independently for each instance and does not require the specific instance name.

* :ref:`caf_sensor_manager`:

  * Updated by cleaning up :file:`sensor_event.h` and :file:`sensor_manager.h` files.
    Moved unrelated declarations to a separate :file:`caf_sensor_common.h` file.

DFU libraries
-------------

* :ref:`lib_dfu_target` library:

  * Added:

>     * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DFU_TARGET_FULL_MODEM_USE_EXT_PARTITION` configuration option to support the ``FMFU_STORAGE`` partition in external flash.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DFU_TARGET_FULL_MODEM_USE_EXT_PARTITION` Kconfig option to support the ``FMFU_STORAGE`` partition in external flash.
```

    * :c:func:`dfu_target_full_modem_fdev_get` function that gets the configured flash device information.

sdk-nrfxlib
-----------

See the changelog for each library in the :doc:`nrfxlib documentation <nrfxlib:README>` for additional information.

Scripts
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`script <scripts>`.

* :ref:`west_sbom`:

>   * Updated so that the output contains source repository and version information for each file.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * The output now contains source repository and version information for each file.
```

Working with nRF52 Series
=========================

* Developing with nRF52 Series:

  * Added Kconfig options :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MCUMGR_BT_OTA_DFU` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MCUMGR_BT_OTA_DFU_SPEEDUP` to configure FOTA updates over Bluetooth Low Energy in the default setup.
    The default setup uses MCUmgr libraries with the Bluetooth transport layer and requires the user to enable MCUboot bootloader.
    See details in the FOTA updates section of the :ref:`ug_nrf52_developing` guide.

Working with nRF53 Series
=========================

* Developing with nRF5340 DK:

  * Added Kconfig options :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MCUMGR_BT_OTA_DFU` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MCUMGR_BT_OTA_DFU_SPEEDUP` to configure FOTA updates over Bluetooth Low Energy in the default setup.
    The default setup uses MCUmgr libraries with the Bluetooth transport layer and requires the user to enable MCUboot bootloader.
    See details in the FOTA updates section of the :ref:`ug_nrf5340` guide.

* Developing with Thingy:53:

>   * Added the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOARD_SERIAL_BACKEND_CDC_ACM` Kconfig option to configure USB CDC ACM to be used as logger's backend by default.

Reviewer 8: Hi @bjornspock
Do you think we should mention the Thingy:53 related changes in the NCS 2.3 release highlights?

Reviewer 9: @MarekPieta Yes, I think it would be nice to point out that MCUboot and logging over USB CDC is enabled by default. And that the CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MCUMGR_BT_OTA_DFU Kconfig option has been added.

Author: @bjornspock  @MarekPieta  The highlights )at the beginning of the release notes) have been discussed and sorted out with PMT.
The information you mention - is this related to a particular sample/application? I'm not sure where to put it.

Reviewer 9: @b-gent Allright, then my points are covered. No further comments from my side.

See `Samples`_ for lists of changes for the protocol-related samples.

Bluetooth LE
------------

See `Bluetooth samples`_ for the list of changes for the Bluetooth samples.

Bluetooth mesh
--------------

* Fixed:

  * An issue in the :ref:`bt_mesh_light_ctrl_srv_readme` model where multiple scene recall messages for the same scene do not repeatedly trigger the same scene recall.
    This prevents the interruption of an ongoing transition.

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`bt_mesh_light_ctrl_srv_readme` model to make sure that the illuminance regulator starts running when a fresh value of the ambient LuxLevel is reported when the controller is enabled.

See `Bluetooth mesh samples`_ for the list of changes for the Bluetooth mesh samples.

Matter
------

* Added:

  * Support for switching between Matter over Thread and Matter over Wi-Fi.
    This feature is available for the :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample programmed on ``nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp`` with the ``nrf7002_ek`` shield attached, using the ``thread_wifi_switched`` build type.
    See :ref:`matter_lock_sample_wifi_thread_switching` in the sample documentation for more information.

>   * Documentation about :ref:`switchable Matter over Thread and Matter over Wi-Fi <ug_matter_overview_architecture_integration_designs>` platform design.

Author: I moved the documentation entries to the end of the list

  * The issue where the ``NetworkInterfaces`` attribute of General Diagnostics cluster would return EUI-64 instead of MAC Extended Address for Thread network interfaces.

* Removed support for Android CHIP Tool from the documentation and release artifacts.
  Moving forward, we recommend using the development tool CHIP Tool for Linux or macOS or mobile applications from publicly available Matter Ecosystems.

See `Matter samples`_ for the list of changes for the Matter samples.

Matter fork
+++++++++++

The Matter fork in the |NCS| (``sdk-connectedhomeip``) contains all commits from the upstream Matter repository up to, and including, the ``1.0.0.2`` tag.

The following list summarizes the most important changes inherited from the upstream Matter:

* Added:

  * The initial implementation of Matter's cryptographic operations based on PSA crypto API.
  * Build-time generation of some Zigbee Cluster Library (ZCL) source files using the :file:`codegen.py` Python script.
  * An alternative factory reset implementation that erases the entire non-volatile storage flash partition.

> * Updated:
> 
>   * Basic cluster has been renamed to Basic Information cluster to match the specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updated Basic cluster by renaming it to Basic Information cluster to match the specification.
```

Thread
------

* Added:

  * Support for setting the default Thread output power using the :kconfig:option:`OPENTHREAD_DEFAULT_TX_POWER` Kconfig option.
  * A Thread :ref:`power consumption data <thread_power_consumption>` page.

See `Thread samples`_ for the list of changes for the Thread samples.

Zigbee
------

* Updated Zigbee Network Co-processor Host package to the new version v2.2.1.

* Fixed an issue where buffer would not be freed at the ZC after a secure rejoin of a ZED.

Enhanced ShockBurst (ESB)
-------------------------

* Added support for front-end modules.
  The ESB module requires linking the :ref:`MPSL library <nrfxlib:mpsl_lib>`.

* Updated:

  * Number of PPI/DPPI channels used from three to six.
  * Events 6 and 7 from the EGU0 instance by assigning them to the ESB module.
  * The type parameter of the function :c:func:`esb_set_tx_power` to ``int8_t``.

Wi-Fi
-----

* Added:

  * New sample :ref:`wifi_sr_coex_sample` demonstrating Wi-Fi Bluetooth LE coexistence.
  * :ref:`ug_wifi` document.
  * :ref:`lib_wifi_credentials` library to store credentials.
  * :ref:`wifi_mgmt_ext` library to provide an autoconnect command based on Wi-Fi credentials.

> * Removed:
> 
>   * nRF7002 revision A support.

Reviewer: And move this probably after 'Updated' `?
```suggestion
* Removed the support for nRF7002 revision A.
```

Author: yes

* :ref:`lwm2m_client` sample:

  * Added:

    * Support for nRF7002 EK shield and Wi-Fi based location.
    * Location events and event handlers.

  * Updated:

    * The sensor module has been simplified.
      It does not use application events, filtering, or configurable periods anymore.
    * Replaced deprecated LwM2M API calls with calls to new functions.
    * Enabled LwM2M queue mode and updated documentation accordingly.
    * Moved configuration options from :file:`overlay-queue.conf` to default configuration :file:`prj.conf`.
    * Removed :file:`overlay-queue.conf`.
    * Enabled :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LTE_LC_TAU_PRE_WARNING_NOTIFICATIONS` configuration option.

* :ref:`http_application_update_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the :ref:`liblwm2m_carrier_readme` library.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_mqtt_multi_service` sample:

  * Added:

    * MCUboot child image files to properly access external flash on newer nRF9160DK versions.
    * An :file:`overlay_mcuboot_ext_flash.conf` file to enable MCUboot use of external flash.
    * Sending an alert to the cloud on boot and when a temperature limit is exceeded.

>   * Updated:
> 
>     * The sample now uses a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Updated the sample to use a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.
```

  * Added sending an alert to nRF Cloud on boot.

* :ref:`slm_shell_sample` sample:

  * Added:

    * Sample for nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices to send AT commands to nRF9160 SiP from shell.

* Removed:

  * Multicell location sample because of the deprecation of the Multicell location library.
    Relevant functionality is available through the :ref:`lib_location` library.
  * nRF9160: Simple MQTT sample.
    This is now replaced by a new :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.

* :ref:`nrf_cloud_rest_fota` sample:

  * Updated:

    * Device status information, including FOTA enablement, is now sent to nRF Cloud when the device connects.
    * Removed user prompt and button press handling for FOTA enablement.
    * The sample now uses a partition in external flash for full modem FOTA updates.

* :ref:`azure_fota_sample` sample:

  * The sample now uses the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`azure_iot_hub` sample:

  * The sample now uses the logging subsystem for console output.

* :ref:`aws_iot` sample:

  * The sample now uses the logging subsystem for console output.

Peripheral samples
------------------

> * :ref:`radio_test` sample:

Reviewer: This should be under 'Other samples'.

  * Added support for the nRF7002 DK.

>   * Fixed sample building with support for the Skyworks front-end module.
>   * Updated the documentation to clarify that this sample is dedicated for the short-range radio (Bluetooth LE, IEEE 802.15.4, and proprietary modes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Updated the documentation to clarify that this sample is dedicated for the short-range radio (Bluetooth LE, IEEE 802.15.4, and proprietary modes).
  * Fixed sample building with support for the Skyworks front-end module.
```

Author: Any reason for this? I'd say doc should be mentioned last.

* :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample:

  * Added:

    * ``thread_wifi_switched`` build type that enables switching between Thread and Wi-Fi network support in the field.
      See :ref:`matter_lock_sample_wifi_thread_switching` in the sample documentation for more information.
    * Wi-Fi low power configuration using Wi-Fi's :ref:`Legacy Power Save mode <ug_nrf70_developing_powersave_dtim_unicast>`.

* :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample`:

  * Added Wi-Fi low power configuration using Wi-Fi's :ref:`Legacy Power Save mode <ug_nrf70_developing_powersave_dtim_unicast>`.

NFC samples
-----------

* Fixed an issue where NFC samples that use the NFC Reader feature returned false error code with value ``1`` during the NFC T4T operation.

Wi-Fi samples
-------------

* Added the :ref:`wifi_sr_coex_sample` sample demonstrating Wi-Fi Bluetooth LE coexistence.

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`wifi_shell_sample` sample now uses the :ref:`lib_wifi_credentials` and :ref:`wifi_mgmt_ext` libraries.
  * The :ref:`wifi_provisioning` sample now uses the :ref:`lib_wifi_credentials` and :ref:`wifi_prov_readme` libraries.

* Removed nRF7002 revision A support.

Other samples
-------------

> * Added the :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample that supports Wi-Fi and LTE connectivity.

Author: I'm guessing that's why it is here - someone didn't want to categorize it as WiFi or 9160 so they put it as Other samples in the changelog...
We could have this entry appear twice , both in nRF9160 samples and Wi-Fi samples, what do you think @umapraseeda  ?

* :ref:`lib_fota_download` library:

  * Fixed:

    * An issue where the :c:func:`download_client_callback` function was continuing to read the offset value even if :c:func:`dfu_target_offset_get` returned an error.
    * An issue where the cleanup of the downloading state was not happening when an error event was raised.

* :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud` library:

  * Added:

    * Support for full modem FOTA updates using a partition in external flash.
    * Device status information is automatically sent to nRF Cloud when the device connects if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS` Kconfig option is enabled.
      Network information is included if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS_NETWORK` Kconfig option is enabled.
      SIM card information is included if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_DEVICE_STATUS_SIM` Kconfig option is enabled.
    * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_DEVICE_STATUS_ENCODE_VOLTAGE` Kconfig option controls if device voltage is included when device status data is encoded.
    * An application version string can now be included in the :c:struct:`nrf_cloud_init_param` struct.

  * Updated:

>     * The MQTT disconnect event is now handled by the FOTA module, allowing for updates to be completed while disconnected and reported properly when reconnected.

Author: I think this changes the meaning and will refrain from making this change.

* Added an option to prevent inclusion of default nRF5340 network core DFU image hook, which allows a custom implementation by users if the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOT_IMAGE_ACCESS_HOOK_NRF5340` Kconfig option is disabled (enabled by default).
  CMake can be used to add additional hook files.
  See :file:`modules/mcuboot/hooks/CMakeLists.txt` for an example of how to achieve this.

Zephyr
======

The Zephyr fork in |NCS| (``sdk-zephyr``) contains all commits from the upstream Zephyr repository up to and including ``e1e06d05fa8d1b6ac1b0dffb1712e94e308861f8``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

For the list of upstream Zephyr commits (not including cherry-picked commits) incorporated into nRF Connect SDK since the most recent release, run the following command from the :file:`ncs/zephyr` repository (after running ``west update``):

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline cd16a8388f ^71ef669ea4

For the list of |NCS| specific commits, including commits cherry-picked from upstream, run:

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline manifest-rev ^cd16a8388f

> The current |NCS| main branch is based on revision ``cd16a8388f`` of Zephyr.

Reviewer 2: @tmon-nordic , kindly please verify the final hashes for the release and provide the updated git log commands.

Reviewer 10: `git log --oneline e1e06d05fa ^cd16a8388f`

`git log --oneline manifest-rev ^e1e06d05fa`

Based on revision ``e1e06d05fa`` (it is just the first 10 characters from the full hash above).

Documentation
=============

* Added:

>   * Documentation page about :ref:`ug_matter_device_security` in the Matter protocol section.
>   * Documentation template for the :ref:`Ecosystem integration <Ecosystem_integration>` user guides.
>   * Documentation on :ref:`ug_avsystem`.

Reviewer: Since it is already under 'Documentation', suggesting to remove 'Documentation' in the following lines:
```suggestion
  * A page about :ref:`ug_matter_device_security` in the Matter protocol section.
  * Template for the :ref:`Ecosystem integration <Ecosystem_integration>` user guides.
  * A page on :ref:`ug_avsystem`.
```

  * The :ref:`ug_nrf70_developing` user guide.
  * A page on :ref:`ug_nrf70_features`.

>   * Documentation template for :ref:`Applications <application>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Template for :ref:`Applications <application>`.
```
